From:  Mohan
Date:  Fri Aug 24, 2001  10:56 am
Subject:  Answers to Most Hindu Criticism

What are the Major factors for Criticism of Hinduism by most of the
others?

Let us check them out.

1)      Idolatry: Christianity, Islam & Judaism all of them call the
Idol Worshippers "Pagans". They think that it is some thing really
bad. But what is Idolatry? The definition of Idolatry is worshipping
some symbol or   Idol of some divine form. So who isn't Idolater?

Every one needs certain symbol for representation of their faith.
Defining Idolatry as only creating Man Like image of god is wrong. If
not so then, people who worship "Shiva Lingam" are not Idolaters, as
they do not worship man like Image of god. If the Christians are not
Idolaters why do they have cross, Jesus & Mother Mary Idols? Or for
an instance what is at K'aba that Muslims bow down to? Or what do
they symbolize by "786"? the only difference being that this people
have a small number of Symbols Hindus have larger number of symbols.

In a broad sense idolatry is not just forming man like image of god
it is symbolizing the god by any means. A fact is that if one
believes in god s/he has to give his/her god some kind of form some
physical attribute, if you say the god is not having any form, no
shape no smell but only voice then the sound is also a physical
attribute. If you say that god "spoke" to Abraham. Or god appeared
from a pillar to Moses what does this means? Isn't it some kind of
symbolizing giving some kind of physical attribute to the god? In
Koran at many places God is represented as to be having man like
attributes. Muslim Priests will say that Allah is sitting on his
throne in heaven. Managing the affairs with the help of his angels.
Isn't this a micro level Idolatry when you give some definition to
the god?

2)      Hindus have So Many Gods: Yes that's true, there are a lot of
gods in Hinduism but what are these gods? Despite of the truth that
there are so many gods, every Hindu believes that they are all one.
The people of old times understood that the power of god is infinite
there are so many different things that can be attributed to god only
so they symbolized some thing/body for every function of god. You
will always find some governor defined for all the functions there
are Angels who take care of different functions In Islam, the same
way there are different gods who look after various functions.
Do you want to check them out?
a)      The Ultimate God : Vishnu, YHWH, Allah.
b)      The one who maintains Record of Deeds of humans: Chitragupta
(Hinduism), Keraman & Katebin (Islam).
c)      The one who will bring about the ultimate destruction: Lord
Shiva (Hinduism) & Angel Israfil (Islam).
    d)   Somebody who takes life of a creature away : Yam / Jam
(Hinduism) & Azrail (Islam).
e)      Some body who looks after Rains etc : Indra / Varuna
(Hinduism) & Mikail (Islam)

Also some of the duties are done by single god/angel. isn't this like
some prime minister keeping some departments to himself? For e.g.
Mankir & Nakir in Islam are those who will ask the man questions
immediately after burial aren't they as good as Jamdoots? Or  Angel
Mikail is the one who looks after distribution of food, this
department is looked after by Lord Vishnu who is sustainer of life.
Angel Gabrail/Zibrail is the one who looks after Information &
broadcast department & carries god's messages isn't he similar to
Narad?
The whole Idea behind having so many gods is that, there are infinite
characteristics of the god, he is the creator, he is the sustainer,
he is the destructor, he is Merciful, and he is just. So Hindus have
defined different attributes of "the god" as one different god. How
can any part of "the god" can be less holy then "the god" himself?

3)      Cast & Untouchability:  Yes Cast system & Untouchability were
there in Hinduism but that is not taught in the Hinduism, It is a
human tendency to project ones self or group to be better than others
& it is also not uncommon in the world that people used Religion &
name of the god as a virtue. This is one of most shameful things. All
of us should get together to fight against it.

4)      Women Under Hinduism: Women have been always given special
status under Hinduism. The Vedas say that no Yajna is complete unless
the hostess offers Ahuti. It is also said that "Yatra Nariyastu
Pujayante; Ramante Tatra Devaha || " Meaning God dwells among those
who respect females.All the Gods have Godesses without whom they are
not complete. The so controversial "Sati" or widow burning process
were not taught in Hinduism as there are no evidences of Sati's  in
ancient Aryan history. Even in the recent past when it came to the
knowledge of world, it was not practiced by all the Hindus, It was
more prominent with some particular group & Parts of India. One can
not attribute practices of some group to the religion as a whole. It
is as wrong as saying that "Muta" is supported Islam.

We can use this forum for enhancing Our own knowledge and presenting
the world the real essence of Hinduism.

