Info: Does Hinduism require one to be a vegetarian?

Date: Wed, 30 Nov 1994 08:09:43 -0500
From: K. Sadananda <sadananda@anvil.nrl.navy.mil>
Sub: Does Hinduism require one to be a vegetarian

Recently two questions were asked - Does Hinduism require one to believe
in God? Does Hinduism require one to be a vegetarian? In a recent article,
I have addressed the first question.  Here I will provides some thoughts
for the second question. 

In relation to the first question, I have discussed what Hinduism stands
for and who is truly a Hindu.  In essence, Hinduism is Sanatana Dharma,
and that Dharma is from time immemorial - it involves pursuit for Moksha. 
Therefore the one who is seeking for Moksha is a true Hindu, irrespective
of the nationality, caste, creed or gender.  With that catholic
understanding, one can see that Hinduism becomes a way of life because the
pursuit of the essential purpose of life is the goal of the Hindu life. 

With that perspective, it is easier to analyze all other questions
including whether Hinduism requires one to be a vegetarian.  Since the
purpose of life is securing liberation or Moksha, until we reach that we
need to live.  Only death is the death of the ego that happens in the
spiritual awakening.  Hence, keeping the body alive by nourishment is the
our Dharma.  That means one has to eat to live (not the other way - living
for eating sake!)

Life lives on life. That is the law of nature.  Whether I eat an animal or
plant I am destroying a life. Among all life forms Man is different from
the rest of the life kingdom.  He has the capability to discriminate the
right from wrong. That also gives him the freedom of choice.  Plants have
just body and perhaps a rudimentary mind. Animals have both body and mind
to express feelings and suffering, but rudimentary intellect.  Man has not
only body, mind but also well developed intellect to discriminate, decide
and to choose.  He always has three choices - Karthum sakhyam, akartum
sakhyam and anyathA karthum sakhyam - he can choose to do, not to do and
do it other way.  For animals and plants there is no freedom of choice. 
They are instinctively driven.  Cow does not sit down before meals, and
inquire whether it should be a vegetarian or non-vegetarian. So is a
tiger.  For a Man the discriminative intellect is very evolved. Plants and
animals do not commit sin in their actions because there is no will
involved in their actions. For a human, the story is different.  You may
wonder why I brought sin in the argument.  Let me explain. 

Sin is nothing but agitations in the mind.  It is these agitations that
prevent me in my journey to Moksha. Mind has to be pure (meaning
un-agitated) for me to see the truth as the truth.  (Bible also says
Blessed are those whose minds are pure).  To define sin more
scientifically - it is the divergence between the mind and intellect.
Intellect knows right from wrong - but we feel like doing things even
though we know they are wrong - that is, the intellect says something, but
mind which should be subservient to intellect rebels and does whatever it
feels like.  This divergence is sin.  After the action is performed -
there is a guilt feeling, because intellect, although was overruled, does
not keep quiet, it keeps prodding " I told you it is wrong. Why did you do
it?" With peace of mind gone Man goes through a "Hell".  Man is not
punished for the sin, he is punished by the sin! - Think about it. 

All yogas, if you analyze clearly, are bringing this integration between
the body, mind and intellect.  For a Yogi - What he thinks, what he speaks
and what he does are in perfect harmony or alignment (Manasaa vAcha
karmana). In our case, we think something but have no guts to say what we
think, our lips says something different from what are thinking - if you
watch the lips and the actions that follow, they are again different! -
There is no integration any where. We live a chaotic life.  Besides
deceiving others, most pathetic is we deceive ourselves, and the worst
thing is we don't even realize that. 

Now, when a tiger kills and eats, it does not commit a sin.  Because its
intellect is rudimentary, and it does not go through any analysis before
it kills - should I kill or not to kill - Should I be a non-vegetarian or
should I be vegetarian?".  When it is hungry, to fill the natures demand,
it kills it pray and eats what it nees and leaves the rest when it is
full.  It is not greedy either.  That is its Swadharma. It follows a
beautiful ecological system. 

It is only man who destroys the ecology by being greedy.  "Should I be a
vegetarian or non-vegetarian?" is asked only by a man.  Why that question
comes? Because man has discriminative intellect, and he does not want to
hurt others to fill his belly.  He learns what `hurt' means because he
surely does not want others to hurt him. Plants are life forms too, should
one hurt them?.  You may ask.  If one can live without hurting any life
forms that is the best, but that is not possible.  Life lives on life -
that is the law of nature.  My role as a human being with discriminative
intellect is to do the least damage to the nature for keeping myself
alive.  At least, I am not consciously aware of suffering of the plants. 
That is why eating to live and not living to eat is the determining
factor. 

In Bhagawad Geeta, Krishna emphatically says that a Sadhaka (one who is in
pursuit of Moksha) should have a compassion for all forms of life - Sarva
Bhuta HitErathAha.  In the spiritual growth, one develops subtler and
subtler intellect (Sukshma Bhuddhi in contrast to TeeKshna Buddhi, i.e.
sharper intellect). That is, the mind is becoming quieter, calmer and
self-contended. Your sensitivity to suffering of others also grows.  Hence
it is advisable to be a vegetarian. 

Even the traditional non-vegetarians repel against eating dogs and cats or
other human beings! Why?  Meat is a meat after all!  But with familiarity
grows a compassion. 

There are many two legged animals in human form with rudimentary
intellect. They behave like animals.  But in the evolutionary ladder one
develops subtler and subtler intellect, then it is advisable to be a
vegetarian - only taking from nature what it needs to keep the body going. 
One should not hurt any life forms to satisfy the craving of ones tongue. 

Should Hindu be a vegetarian? Since such a question already arose in your
mind, you have a degree of sensitivity not to hurt other living forms to
satisfy your belly. Then you may be better off not eating meat and you
will be at peace with yourself.  Since you are sensitive to this your
intellect directing you one way and your mind wants some baser pleasures
and directing you the other way. When you go against your own intellect
you commit sin. That is against your SWADHARMA as Krishna puts it. 

Besides, now, even the traditional non-vegetarians are choosing
vegetarianism not because of any compassion to other animals but they are
recognizing that it is not good for their health. 

I have already mentioned that Hinduism has no doos and don'ts, but you
determine your own doos and don'ts based on your intellectual values,
culture, education and primary goal in life.  You will find that following
your Swadharma makes you comfortable with yourself. It is not others to
judge, it is for you to judge.  If you are agitated, that means you are
loosing peace of mind for these and that is a sin!  Imagine your self that
chicken or cow that you are eating. Would you not advice the guy who is
eating you to be a vegetarian instead and spare its life.  Do not say you
are not killing the animal yourself, and killing will go on whether you
eat or not.  If you don't eat, one animal is spared. This is the demand
and supply.  I may not be stealing my self, but if I buy the stolen
property knowing that it was stolen, it is a crime! Is it not?  Now there
are imitation meats too - so why the crave for a dead meet.  Why do you
want your stomach to be a burial ground for a dead animal. 

>From Hinduism point, it does not really care.  All it wants is for you to
pursue the path towards the Sanatanadharma.  So do what is needful to keep
your mind calm and un-agitated.  Purification of the mind is the means for
attaining salvation, and that is the goal of human life.  Since by willful
actions we got ourselves into this mess of Samsar, it is by willful
Sadhana only we can get out of it. Lord has given us the intelligence to
accomplish this - Krishna declares - you are better off following your
swadharma than paradharma.  Swadharma (is not just what caste you belong
or what religion you belong) in the final analysis it is what your
intellect or conscious dictates.  Because, after the action is performed,
it is your mind that has to settle accounts with your intellect. 

Do yourself a favor - eat what#you need and discard what you really donot
need it. That way your make your life simple, peaceful and healthy with
low cholesteral.  Hari Om and Tat Sat. - Sadananda

It is only a fool who does not take life seriously.
It is intelligent who seriously takes life seriously.
It is wise who seriously does not take life seriously. For him the life is an
enchanting sport to be played to the best! Win or loose, it is a fun to play.
------------------
Dr. K. Sadananda                  Voice:(202)767-2117
Code 6323                         FAX: (202)767-2623
Naval Research Laboratory         E-Mail:sadananda@anvil.nrl.navy.mil
Washington, D.C. 20375


[Submitted by: India Network  (kvrao@indnet.bgsu.edu)
               Wed, 30 Nov 1994 09:29:44 -0500 (EST)]
.
